.TH MOTEL 1 "2026-02-23" "Motel" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
motel \- synthetic OpenTelemetry generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B motel validate
[\fB\-\-semconv\fR \fIdir\fR]
\fItopology.yaml\fR
.PP
.B motel run
[\fIflags\fR]
\fItopology.yaml\fR
.PP
.B motel import
[\fB\-\-format\fR \fIauto\fR|\fIstdouttrace\fR|\fIotlp\fR]
[\fB\-\-min\-traces\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fIfile\fR]
.PP
.B motel check
[\fB\-\-max\-depth\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-max\-fan\-out\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-max\-spans\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-samples\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-seed\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-semconv\fR \fIdir\fR]
\fItopology.yaml\fR
.PP
.B motel preview
[\fB\-\-duration\fR \fIduration\fR]
[\fB\-\-output\fR \fIfile\fR]
\fItopology.yaml\fR
.PP
.B motel completion
\fIbash\fR|\fIzsh\fR|\fIfish\fR|\fIpowershell\fR
.PP
.B motel version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B motel
generates OpenTelemetry signals (traces, metrics, and logs) from a YAML
topology definition. No server or live services are required \(em describe the
behaviour of your system and motel derives telemetry from it.
.PP
A topology defines \fBservices\fR containing \fBoperations\fR which call other
operations, a \fBtraffic\fR rate, and optional \fBscenarios\fR that apply
time\-windowed overrides. The engine walks the topology tree once per trace,
sampling durations and errors from the configured distributions.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS validate
Check a topology file for errors. Prints a summary on success or a precise
error message on failure.
.TP
.B \-\-semconv
\fIdir\fR
Directory of additional semantic convention YAML files to load.
.SS run
Generate synthetic signals from a topology.
.TP
.B \-\-duration
\fIduration\fR
Simulation duration, e.g. 10s, 5m, 1h (default: 1m).
.TP
.B \-\-endpoint
\fIhost:port\fR
OTLP endpoint (default: localhost:4318 for http/protobuf, localhost:4317 for
grpc). Ignored when \fB\-\-stdout\fR is set.
.TP
.B \-\-protocol
\fIhttp/protobuf\fR|\fIgrpc\fR
OTLP protocol (default: http/protobuf).
.TP
.B \-\-signals
\fIsignals\fR
Comma\-separated signals to emit: traces,metrics,logs (default: traces).
.TP
.B \-\-slow\-threshold
\fIduration\fR
Spans exceeding this duration emit a slow\-span log record (default: 1s).
Only has an effect when \fBlogs\fR is included in \fB\-\-signals\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-spans\-per\-trace
\fIN\fR
Safety limit for deep topologies (default: 10000). Pass 0 to use the default.
.TP
.B \-\-stdout
Emit signals to stdout as JSON instead of sending to an endpoint.
.TP
.B \-\-label\-scenarios
Add a \fBsynth.scenarios\fR attribute to spans listing active scenario names.
.TP
.B \-\-semconv
\fIdir\fR
Directory of additional semantic convention YAML files to load.
.TP
.B \-\-pprof
\fIaddr\fR
Start a pprof HTTP server on this address (e.g. :6060) for profiling.
.SS import
Infer a topology from existing trace data. Reads from \fIfile\fR or stdin if
no file is given. Output is a YAML topology written to stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-format
\fIauto\fR|\fIstdouttrace\fR|\fIotlp\fR
Input format (default: auto). The auto detector examines the first line.
.TP
.B \-\-min\-traces
\fIN\fR
Minimum traces for statistical accuracy; warns if fewer (default: 1).
.SS check
Run structural checks on a topology. Computes worst\-case trace depth,
fan\-out per span, and total spans per trace using static graph analysis,
then validates these against configurable limits. Optionally runs sampled
exploration to measure empirical values.
.PP
Exits with code 0 if all checks pass, 1 if any check fails.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-depth
\fIN\fR
Fail if worst\-case trace depth exceeds this (default: 10).
.TP
.B \-\-max\-fan\-out
\fIN\fR
Fail if worst\-case children per span exceeds this (default: 100).
.TP
.B \-\-max\-spans
\fIN\fR
Fail if worst\-case spans per trace exceeds this (default: 10000).
.TP
.B \-\-samples
\fIN\fR
Number of sampled traces for empirical measurement (default: 1000).
Set to 0 to skip sampling.
.TP
.B \-\-seed
\fIN\fR
Random seed for reproducibility. When 0 (default), a random seed is used.
.TP
.B \-\-semconv
\fIdir\fR
Directory of additional semantic convention YAML files to load.
.SS preview
Render the traffic rate over time as an SVG chart. Useful for visualising how
traffic and scenarios interact before running a simulation.
.TP
.B \-\-duration
\fIduration\fR
Preview duration (default: inferred from topology).
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output
\fIfile\fR
Output file path (default: stdout).
.SS completion
Generate shell autocompletion scripts for bash, zsh, fish, or powershell.
See \fBmotel completion \-\-help\fR for installation instructions.
.SS version
Print the build version and exit.
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
When \fB\-\-stdout\fR is used with \fBrun\fR:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBstdout\fR \(em one JSON object per line (stdouttrace format), one span per line.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBstderr\fR \(em a single JSON statistics object on the final line, containing
trace count, span count, error rate, and other run metrics.
.PP
This split allows capturing spans and stats separately:
.PP
.RS
.nf
motel run \-\-stdout config.yaml > spans.jsonl 2> stats.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
The stdout format is the same format accepted by \fBmotel import\fR.
.SH TOPOLOGY DSL
The topology file has four top\-level keys:
.TP
.B version
Schema version (required). Currently must be \fB1\fR.
.TP
.B services
Map of service names to their operations. Each operation defines a duration,
optional error rate, optional attributes, and optional calls to other
operations.
.TP
.B traffic
Controls how often root operations are invoked. Accepts a \fBrate\fR
(e.g. \fB100/s\fR).
.TP
.B scenarios
Optional list of time\-windowed overrides. Each scenario has a \fBname\fR,
\fBat\fR (start offset), \fBduration\fR, and an \fBoverride\fR block that
modifies operation behaviour while active.
.PP
A minimal topology using all four keys:
.PP
.RS
.nf
version: 1

services:
  gateway:
    operations:
      GET /search:
        duration: 50ms +/\- 15ms
        error_rate: 0.5%
        calls:
          \- backend.query

  backend:
    operations:
      query:
        duration: 10ms +/\- 3ms
        error_rate: 0.1%

traffic:
  rate: 100/s

scenarios:
  \- name: slow database
    at: +2m
    duration: 5m
    override:
      backend.query:
        duration: 500ms +/\- 100ms
        error_rate: 10%
.fi
.RE
.PP
See the full DSL reference in the project repository.
.SH EXAMPLES
Validate a topology:
.PP
.RS
.nf
motel validate docs/examples/basic\-topology.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate traces to stdout for 5 seconds:
.PP
.RS
.nf
motel run \-\-stdout \-\-duration 5s docs/examples/basic\-topology.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Send traces to a collector:
.PP
.RS
.nf
motel run \-\-endpoint localhost:4318 \-\-duration 30s topology.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Import a topology from trace data:
.PP
.RS
.nf
motel import traces.jsonl > inferred\-topology.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check a topology for span explosions:
.PP
.RS
.nf
motel check topology.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Fail if trace depth exceeds 5:
.PP
.RS
.nf
motel check \-\-max\-depth 5 topology.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Preview traffic rate as SVG:
.PP
.RS
.nf
motel preview \-o traffic.svg topology.yaml
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful execution.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred (invalid topology, unreachable endpoint, failed check, etc.).
.SH SEE ALSO
.UR https://github.com/andrewh/motel
Project repository and full documentation
.UE
.PP
.UR https://github.com/andrewh/motel/tree/main/docs/examples
Example topology files
.UE
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/andrewh/motel/issues
.UE
